= Bandyopadhyay Microtubule Conductance =

{{Audience_Sidebar
| difficulty   = Intermediate
| reading_time = 9 minutes
| prerequisites = Basic solid-state physics (conductance); some [[Microtubule|microtubule]] biology.
| if_too_advanced_see = [[Microtubule]]; [[Could_the_Brain_Use_Quantum_Mechanics]]
| if_you_want_the_math_see = [[Celardo_Microtubule_Superradiance]]
}}

{{Notation
| signature = Mostly-plus.
| units     = SI for observables; conductance in siemens (S) or G<sub>0</sub> = 2e<sup>2</sup>/h.
}}

The '''Bandyopadhyay microtubule conductance experiments''' are a series of measurements by '''Anirban Bandyopadhyay''' and collaborators at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS, Tsukuba, Japan), beginning around 2011 and continuing through the 2020s. The experiments use single-molecule electrical-transport techniques to measure the electronic conductance of '''single microtubules''' at room temperature.

The reported results are striking: microtubules exhibit '''anomalously high''' DC and AC conductance, with sharp resonant frequency peaks in the kHz–THz range, behaviour that is inconsistent with standard biological-polymer models and consistent with '''quantum-coherent electronic transport''' along the microtubule lattice.

If confirmed by independent groups at high precision, these results would provide a significant empirical foundation for the [[Orchestrated_Objective_Reduction|Orch OR]] proposal and for the framework's [[Biological_Substrate_of_Psi|microtubule substrate]] for ψ-coupling.

{{Psi-claim
| status = EXPERIMENTAL
| claim = Single microtubules exhibit AC conductance resonances that may support computational/quantum effects.
| cites = [[Anirban Bandyopadhyay]], [[Coherent Quantum Effects in Biology]]
| methods = Active trials underway; preliminary results mixed.
| falsifier = Two or more independent replications producing directly conflicting outcomes.
| confidence = low
| last_reviewed = 2026-05-12
}}

== Experimental setup ==

The Bandyopadhyay group's experiments use:

* '''Single-molecule conductance measurement''' — a single microtubule (~ 25 nm diameter, length variable from ~ 100 nm to several μm) bridged between two nanopatterned electrodes.
* '''Room temperature, aqueous environment''' — to ensure biological relevance.
* '''Frequency sweep''' — AC conductance measured across many decades of frequency, from DC up to ~ THz.
* '''Multiple microtubule preparations''' — isolated brain microtubules, in vitro reconstituted microtubules from purified tubulin, and microtubules with various drug treatments.

== Key results ==

=== Anomalously high conductance ===

DC conductance of single microtubules is reported at levels '''many orders of magnitude higher''' than would be expected for a biological insulator or weakly-conducting polymer. Reported values are consistent with quasi-metallic electronic transport along the lattice.

=== Sharp frequency-resonance peaks ===

AC conductance shows '''sharp resonant peaks''' at specific frequencies in the kHz, MHz, GHz, and THz ranges. The reported peak frequencies include:

* '''Slow''' (~ kHz): coupling to ionic motions and slow conformational modes.
* '''Intermediate''' (~ MHz): coupling to dielectric-relaxation modes.
* '''Fast''' (~ GHz–THz): coupling to electronic and tubulin-orientational modes; particular peaks reported at ~ 14 MHz, 250 MHz, 8 GHz, 200 GHz.

The peaks are sharp (high Q-factor), suggesting underlying coherent oscillator modes rather than broadband dielectric loss.

=== Coherence and lattice-length dependence ===

Conductance peaks scale with microtubule length in ways consistent with coherent transport along the lattice. The reported behaviour does not match a simple Ohmic resistor model.

=== Drug-modulated behaviour ===

Treatments with anaesthetics, microtubule-stabilising agents (taxol), and microtubule-destabilising agents (vinblastine, colchicine) modulate the measured conductance in ways consistent with the lattice integrity being central to the coherent transport.

== Theoretical interpretation ==

Several interpretations have been advanced:

# '''Quasi-1D quantum-coherent transport''' along the microtubule's helical pattern of aromatic-residue chromophores.
# '''Tubulin-orientation coupled vibronic states''' — coupled electronic-vibrational modes in tubulin dimers.
# '''Ordered-water lumen as a coherent dielectric medium''' supporting electronic states differently from bulk water.
# '''Collective superradiance''' — see [[Celardo_Microtubule_Superradiance]] for the theoretical proposal that aromatic-residue arrays produce coherent emission with characteristic frequency peaks.

None of these is yet a settled, quantitative theory; each is consistent with the observed behaviour but does not yet predict the specific peak frequencies.

== Replication status ==

The Bandyopadhyay group has published the results in multiple peer-reviewed journals:

* Sahu, S., et al. (2013). "Atomic water channel controlling remarkable properties of a single brain microtubule." ''Biosensors and Bioelectronics'' 47: 141–148.
* Sahu, S., Ghosh, S., Hirata, K., Fujita, D., Bandyopadhyay, A. (2013). "Multi-level memory-switching properties of a single brain microtubule." ''Applied Physics Letters'' 102: 123701.
* Additional papers in ''Journal of Integrative Neuroscience'', ''Journal of Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics'', and conference proceedings.

'''Independent replication''' of the specific frequency-resonance peaks at the precision reported by Bandyopadhyay has been '''limited'''. Some replication-type work has been done but with somewhat different methodologies; clean independent confirmation is not yet established at the level required for full scientific consensus.

The challenges to replication:

* Single-molecule conductance with the specific nanopatterned-electrode geometry is technically demanding.
* Microtubule preparation protocols vary across labs.
* AC conductance measurements across many frequency decades require specialised instrumentation.

Multi-laboratory replication is one of the highest priorities for empirical psi-substrate research. See [[Open_Questions_in_Psionics]].

== Status in the framework ==

In the [[Psionics|psionic framework]], the Bandyopadhyay results — if confirmed — provide empirical support for:

* '''Microtubules as a quantum-coherent electronic substrate''' — consistent with the framework's prediction that microtubule electronic states couple to ψ via the αψ F<sub>μν</sub> F<sup>μν</sup> vertex.
* '''Specific frequency peaks''' — predictions of which discrete oscillator modes contribute to ψ-coupling. The framework does not yet predict the specific peak frequencies, but they constitute observable signatures.
* '''Substrate-level confirmation of Orch OR''' — without confirming the gravitational-OR mechanism, the results support the broader picture that microtubules are an unusual electronic system relevant to cognition.

The framework is '''not dependent''' on the Bandyopadhyay results being fully confirmed; the broader collective-neural-oscillation substrate (substrate 1 in [[Biological_Substrate_of_Psi]]) is robust. But if Bandyopadhyay is right, the microtubule contribution is substantial.

== Sanity checks ==

* '''Microtubule depolymerisation''' → loss of conductance peaks. Reported. ✓
* '''Above body temperature''' (heat denaturation) → loss of conductance peaks. Reported. ✓
* '''Bulk-water environment without microtubule''' → no conductance peaks. ✓
* '''ψ → 0''' (in framework) → microtubule conductance peaks may still exist via standard quantum-biology mechanisms. ✓ ([[Sanity_Check_Limits]] §12.)

== Open questions ==

# Quantitative prediction of the specific peak frequencies from first principles.
# Independent multi-lab replication at the precision required for full acceptance.
# Direct biological-function tests: do the conductance peaks correlate with cognitive states in vivo?
# How does the conductance scale with microtubule length, lattice perfection, and post-translational modifications?

See [[Open_Questions_in_Psionics]].

== See Also ==

* [[Microtubule]]
* [[Orchestrated_Objective_Reduction]]
* [[Celardo_Microtubule_Superradiance]]
* [[Kalra_Anaesthetic_Microtubule]]
* [[Tegmark_Critique_and_Hagan_Rebuttal]]
* [[Anirban_Bandyopadhyay]]
* [[Biological_Substrate_of_Psi]]
* [[Famous_Experiments]]

== References ==

* Sahu, S., Ghosh, S., Hirata, K., Fujita, D., Bandyopadhyay, A. (2013). "Multi-level memory-switching properties of a single brain microtubule." ''Applied Physics Letters'' 102: 123701.
* Sahu, S., et al. (2013). "Atomic water channel controlling remarkable properties of a single brain microtubule: Correlating single protein to its supramolecular assembly." ''Biosensors and Bioelectronics'' 47: 141–148.
* Ghosh, S., Aswani, K., Singh, S., Sahu, S., Fujita, D., Bandyopadhyay, A. (2014). "Design and construction of a brain-like computer: A new class of frequency-fractal computing using wireless communication in a supramolecular organic, inorganic system." ''Information'' 5: 28–100.
* Bandyopadhyay, A. (2021). ''Nanobrain: The Making of an Artificial Brain from a Time Crystal.'' CRC Press.

[[Category:Psionics]]
[[Category:Consciousness]]
[[Category:Experiments]]
[[Category:Biology]]