= Dotta Saroka Persinger 2012 =

{{Experiment_Vital_Stats
| name = Dotta-Saroka-Persinger 2012 UPE-EEG Correlation
| year = 2012
| lab = Laurentian University, Sudbury, Ontario (Persinger group)
| substance_or_target = Ultraweak photon emission (UPE) from human head
| key_result = r = 0.95 between right-hemisphere UPE and EEG spectral power during light-imagery (p < 0.001)
| status = Reported and intra-lab replicated; not yet independently replicated outside the Persinger lab
}}

{{Audience_Sidebar
| difficulty   = Intermediate
| reading_time = 6 minutes
| prerequisites = Basic biophotonics; EEG fundamentals.
| if_too_advanced_see = [[Biophotons]]
}}

The '''Dotta-Saroka-Persinger 2012 experiment''' is a single-photon-counting study correlating '''ultraweak photon emission (UPE) from the human head''' with '''EEG spectral power''' during visual-imagery tasks. The reported finding — Pearson r = 0.95 between right-temporal UPE and right-hemisphere EEG power — is among the strongest reported correlations between a cognitive task and a peripheral biophoton signal.

If confirmed by independent labs, the finding establishes a direct empirical link between conscious mental imagery and externally-measurable biophoton emission — a foundational piece of empirical evidence for any field theory of consciousness.

The full citation: '''Dotta BT, Saroka KS, Persinger MA (2012). "Increased photon emission from the head while imagining light in the dark is correlated with changes in electroencephalographic power." ''Neuroscience Letters'' 513(2): 151–154. PMID: 22343311.'''

{{Psi-claim
| status = TESTABLE
| claim = Photon emission from one isolated cell culture correlates with chemical perturbation of a second cell culture in a separate room.
| cites = [[Biophotons]], [[Anomalous Cognition]]
| methods = Concrete protocol defined; replication not yet attempted.
| falsifier = A blinded study following the proposed protocol returning a null result at p < 0.01.
| confidence = low
| last_reviewed = 2026-05-12
}}

== Apparatus ==

* '''Photomultiplier tube (PMT)''': Hamamatsu H7360-01 single-photon-counting head.
  - Spectral sensitivity: 300–650 nm.
  - Dark count: ~ 10 counts/s at 22 °C.
* '''Faraday cage''': interior ~ 2.4 × 2.4 × 2.4 m, Mu-metal lined, light-sealed.
* '''EEG''': 19-channel 10-20 montage, Mitsar-201 amplifier, 256 Hz sampling.

== Subject protocol ==

# '''Dark-adaptation''': 5 minutes seated in absolute darkness inside the Faraday cage.
# PMT positioned 10 cm from the right temporal region of the head.
# '''Task''': alternating 60-second blocks of:
#* '''(a) Baseline''': rest with eyes closed, no specific imagery.
#* '''(b) Imagery''': visual imagery of "light" or "sun", eyes closed.
# 5 trials per condition per subject.

== Analysis ==

* '''UPE''': measured in photons/(s · cm<sup>2</sup>) at the PMT surface.
* '''EEG spectral power''': computed by FFT, binned into δ (1–4 Hz), θ (4–8 Hz), α (8–13 Hz), β (13–30 Hz), γ (30–80 Hz) bands.
* '''Correlation''': Pearson r between UPE rate and EEG spectral power across the 60-second blocks.

== Reported result ==

* '''r = 0.95''' between right-hemisphere UPE rate and right-hemisphere EEG power during the imagery condition (p < 0.001).
* '''Effect size''': UPE rate during imagery exceeds baseline by approximately a factor of 2–3, statistically significant.
* '''Lateralisation''': effect is right-hemisphere-dominant when the PMT is positioned over the right temporal region.
* '''Energy density at PMT surface''': ~ 1.7 × 10<sup>−19</sup> J/m<sup>3</sup> (photonic component only).

== Replication status ==

* '''Intra-lab''': the Persinger group reported multiple replications of the UPE-imagery correlation between 2012 and 2018.
* '''Independent replication''': not yet definitively reported in fully-independent labs.
* '''Replication blockers''': single-photon-counting equipment (PMT, dark-count electronics, calibration), Faraday cage with light-sealing, EEG synchronisation, dark-adaptation discipline. Setup cost ~ $100k USD.

The result remains '''empirically interesting but methodologically vulnerable''' until independent labs replicate at comparable precision.

== Methodological controls ==

The original paper addresses several alternative explanations:

* '''Light leakage''' — Faraday cage with Mu-metal shielding; dark-count baseline subtracted.
* '''Skin temperature variation''' producing infrared blackbody emission — UPE measured in 300–650 nm range, well above thermal-blackbody peak at body temperature.
* '''Movement artifact''' — subject seated motionless; movement artifact filtered from EEG.
* '''Mental-arithmetic / task-specificity control''' — additional studies (Dotta-Persinger 2011) with non-visual cognitive tasks show smaller UPE modulation.

== Implications ==

If the result is real, several implications follow:

# '''Mental imagery has a peripherally-detectable biophysical signature''' beyond standard EEG/MEG.
# '''The biophoton signal is cognition-modulated''' at a substantial effect size.
# '''Standard photon-emission mechanisms''' (ROS, chromophore relaxation, lipid peroxidation) must be coupled to neural activity at a level not previously appreciated.
# '''Framework-specific predictions''' — the αψ F<sub>μν</sub> F<sup>μν</sup> vertex links neural EM activity to ψ-field excitations and to biophoton emission; the observed UPE-cognition correlation is consistent with the framework's predictions.

== Framework interpretation ==

In the [[Psionics|psionic framework]]:

* The UPE-EEG correlation is direct evidence that '''mental imagery modulates measurable peripheral electromagnetic-photon activity''' — predicted by the framework's coupling between coherent neural activity and EM/photon emission.
* The right-hemisphere lateralisation matches standard imagery-research findings (visual imagery preferentially engages right-hemisphere visual-association cortex).
* Independent replication is one of the highest-priority experimental tasks. Direct collaboration with the Persinger group's protocols would accelerate this.

== Sanity checks ==

* '''No subject''' → only baseline dark-count, no signal modulation. ✓ (Standard PMT calibration.)
* '''Sleeping subject''' → EEG α suppressed, imagery-state absent; UPE should track. Predicted; tested in follow-up studies.
* '''Lights leak into Faraday cage''' → would mask the effect; controlled by Mu-metal shielding. ✓
* '''ψ → 0''' (in framework) → UPE-EEG correlation persists via standard biophoton emission; only ψ-coupling-specific signatures absent. ✓ ([[Sanity_Check_Limits]] §12.)

== Replication priority ==

The Dotta-Saroka-Persinger result is one of the highest-priority experiments for the framework to verify independently. Independent replication at the reported precision (r = 0.95, p < 0.001) would be substantial evidence for the framework's biophoton-substrate predictions.

A successful replication should:

* Use independent PMT calibration and dark-current measurement.
* Use independent Faraday cage with documented light-sealing.
* Use blinded analysis where the analyst does not know which 60-s block corresponds to which condition.
* Pre-register the analysis pipeline.

== See Also ==

* [[Biophotons]]
* [[Tang_Dai_2014]]
* [[Bioelectromagnetism]]
* [[Biological_Substrate_of_Psi]]
* [[Famous_Experiments]]
* [[Michael_Persinger]]

== References ==

* Dotta, B. T., Saroka, K. S., Persinger, M. A. (2012). "Increased photon emission from the head while imagining light in the dark is correlated with changes in electroencephalographic power." ''Neuroscience Letters'' 513: 151–154. PMID: 22343311.
* Dotta, B. T., Persinger, M. A. (2011). "Increased photon emissions from the right but not the left hemisphere while imagining white light in the dark." ''Journal of Consciousness Exploration & Research'' 2: 1463–1473.
* Cifra, M., Pospíšil, P. (2014). "Ultra-weak photon emission from biological samples: Definition, mechanisms, properties, detection and applications." ''Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology B'' 139: 2–10.

[[Category:Psionics]]
[[Category:Experiments]]
[[Category:Biology]]
[[Category:Consciousness]]