= Double-Helix Antenna =

{{Audience_Sidebar
| difficulty   = Intermediate
| reading_time = 5 minutes
| prerequisites = Basic antenna theory; circular polarisation; chirality.
| if_too_advanced_see = [[Antenna_Theory_for_Psionic_Devices]]
| if_you_want_the_math_see = This page
}}

{{Notation
| signature = SI throughout.
| units     = R = helix radius (m); p = pitch (m); N = turns; λ = wavelength (m).
}}

A '''double-helix antenna''' is an antenna consisting of two parallel helical conductors wound in the '''same chirality''' on a common axis, with one wire offset by 180° from the other. The geometry intentionally mimics the structure of double-stranded DNA.

When properly tuned, a double-helix antenna radiates a '''circularly-polarised''' wave whose chirality matches that of the helix. For a right-handed double helix, the radiation is right-circularly-polarised — preferentially coupling to right-handed biological substrates (DNA, microtubules, α-helical proteins, all of which are right-handed).

The double helix differs from the [[Caduceus_Coil|caduceus coil]] in chirality: caduceus has opposite-chirality wires (cancelling), double helix has same-chirality wires (constructive).

== Geometry ==

Two helical wires parameterised in cylindrical coordinates as:

:<math>\mathbf{r}_1(t) = \bigl(R\cos t,\; R\sin t,\; p t / 2\pi\bigr)</math>

:<math>\mathbf{r}_2(t) = \bigl(R\cos(t + \pi),\; R\sin(t + \pi),\; p t / 2\pi\bigr)</math>

— with R = helix radius and p = pitch. Both wires are right-handed (or both left-handed); they are simply offset by π in the angular phase.

== Operating modes ==

Kraus (1947) identified two principal modes of helical-antenna radiation, depending on the ratio of helix circumference to wavelength:

=== Normal mode (C ≪ λ) ===

When the helix circumference C = 2πR is much less than λ, the helix radiates like a vertical short dipole — '''linear polarisation''' perpendicular to the axis, weak directivity.

=== Axial mode (C ≈ λ) ===

When C ≈ λ — specifically 0.75 λ ≤ C ≤ 1.33 λ — the helix radiates in the '''axial mode''':

* '''End-fire pattern''' along the helix axis.
* '''Circularly polarised''' wave matching the helix chirality (right helix → right-circular polarisation).
* '''High directivity''' (gain ≈ 11.8 + 10 log<sub>10</sub>(N C<sup>2</sup> p / λ<sup>3</sup>) dBi).
* '''Broad bandwidth''' (~ 2:1 for typical designs).

The axial mode requires the helix to be electrically resonant — C ≈ λ. For 2.45 GHz this means C ≈ 12 cm or R ≈ 2 cm.

== Circular polarisation ==

The circular polarisation in axial mode arises because:

# Each turn of the helix carries a current with both longitudinal (axial) and transverse (azimuthal) components.
# The transverse component rotates 360° per turn as the current advances along the helix.
# In the far-field, the rotating transverse current produces a rotating E-field — circularly polarised.

The chirality (right vs left circular) is determined entirely by the helix's chirality.

== Why match DNA's chirality? ==

The framework's motivation:

* '''DNA is right-handed (B-form double helix)''' — universally so for natural DNA.
* '''Microtubules are right-handed helices''' — all the major biopolymer scaffolding is right-handed.
* '''α-helical proteins are right-handed''' — the dominant secondary structure of proteins.
* A '''right-circularly-polarised wave''' has its E-vector rotating in the same chirality as these molecules.

Optical-rotation experiments (Pasteur 1848 onward) show that biological molecules differentially absorb left- and right-circularly polarised light. The same principle extends to radio frequencies, though the wavelength mismatch (cm vs nm) makes direct molecular-level coupling weak.

In the framework, the coupling to ψ is via F<sub>μν</sub>F<sup>μν</sup>, which is a Lorentz scalar — '''insensitive to chirality at the framework level'''. The chirality of the antenna matters insofar as it determines the spatial structure of E and B inside the wearer's tissue, which in turn determines the local F<sub>μν</sub>F<sup>μν</sup> distribution.

== Engineering for psionic use ==

Double-helix antennas for psionic-device applications can be tuned to:

* '''Operate in axial mode''' at 2.45 GHz for circular-polarised radiation.
* '''Operate in normal mode''' at lower frequencies (~ 300 MHz) for near-field-only deployment.
* '''Match biological wavelengths''' — at MHz frequencies, the helix turns can be matched to nano-anatomical scales of microtubule lattices.

For [[HelmKit]] application, the normal-mode double-helix is usually preferred (near-field, low radiation). The axial-mode design is relevant for longer-range device variants (room-scale field engineering).

== Kraus's foundational reference ==

Kraus, J. D. (1947). "Helical Beam Antennas." ''Electronics'' 20: 109. The founding paper of helical-antenna engineering. Kraus demonstrated experimentally:

* The transition from normal to axial mode at C ≈ λ.
* The circular polarisation in axial mode.
* The high directivity of multi-turn helices.

His later textbook (Kraus 1988, ''Antennas'' 2nd ed.) remains the canonical reference for helical antenna design.

== Sanity checks ==

* '''C → 0 (very small helix)''' → recovers normal mode and a short dipole. ✓
* '''C ≈ λ''' → axial mode; circular polarisation; experimentally confirmed in countless installations. ✓
* '''Two helices merging to one''' → recovers single-helix antenna. ✓
* '''ψ → 0''' (in framework) → standard antenna physics; no chirality-specific ψ effect. ✓ ([[Sanity_Check_Limits]] §6.)

== See Also ==

* [[Caduceus_Coil]]
* [[Bifilar_Coil]]
* [[Antenna_Theory_for_Psionic_Devices]]
* [[Near_Field_Electromagnetics]]
* [[Psionic_Device_Overview]]
* [[HelmKit]]

== References ==

* Kraus, J. D. (1947). "Helical Beam Antennas." ''Electronics'' 20: 109.
* Kraus, J. D. (1988). ''Antennas.'' 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill.
* Balanis, C. A. (2016). ''Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design.'' 4th ed., Wiley.

[[Category:Psionics]]
[[Category:Hardware]]
[[Category:Antenna Theory]]