= Glossary of Psionics =

{{Audience_Sidebar
| difficulty   = Plain
| reading_time = 15 minutes
| prerequisites = none
| if_you_want_the_math_see = [[Symbol_Glossary]]
}}

Plain-language definitions of every term used across the [[Psionics]] cluster. For the mathematical/typographical symbol reference (<math>\psi</math>, <math>T_{\mu\nu}</math>, <math>\Gamma^\mu_{\nu\rho}</math>, …) see [[Symbol_Glossary]].

Terms are grouped by area and listed alphabetically inside each group. Cross-references are wikilinked.

== Foundational concepts ==

; Action (physics)
: A single number computed from the entire history of a system. The path the system actually follows is the one that ''minimises'' (or extremises) the action. Every modern physical theory — including [[5D_Action_Principle|the 5D parent theory of psionics]] — is written by specifying an action.

; Field (physics)
: A quantity defined at every point of space and time. The air's temperature is a scalar field; a wind map is a vector field; the [[Psi_Field|psi field]] is a scalar field; the electromagnetic field is a tensor field.

; Lagrangian
: The integrand of the action — the density (per spacetime volume) whose total integral is the action. Specifying the Lagrangian is the standard way to write down a theory.

; Scalar field
: A field that assigns a single real number to each point of spacetime. Examples: temperature, pressure, the [[Higgs_Field|Higgs field]], the [[Psi_Field|ψ field]].

; Spacetime
: The combined 4-dimensional fabric of space (3 dimensions) and time (1 dimension). In [[5D_Action_Principle|5D theories]] one additional spatial dimension is added, usually compactified.

; Stress-energy tensor <math>T_{\mu\nu}</math>
: The complete bookkeeping of energy, momentum, momentum-flux, and stress carried by a field. <math>T^{00}</math> is energy density; <math>T^{0i}</math> is energy flux; <math>T^{ij}</math> is stress and pressure. In [[Psi_Field|psionics]] <math>T^{00}(\psi)</math> is the quantity practitioners feel directly as "energy".

; Tensor
: A multi-indexed generalisation of vectors and matrices that transforms in a well-defined way under change of coordinates. The metric <math>g_{\mu\nu}</math> and stress-energy <math>T_{\mu\nu}</math> are rank-2 tensors.

; Wave equation
: A partial differential equation of the form <math>\Box\varphi = \text{source}</math> whose solutions propagate at the speed of light (in the massless case) or slower (with mass). The [[Psi_Field|ψ field]] obeys a wave equation.

== ψ-specific concepts ==

; Psion
: The quantum of the [[Psi_Field|ψ field]] - a real, spin-0, self-conjugate scalar boson of mass <math>m</math>, coupled to electromagnetism via <math>\alpha\,\psi\,F_{\mu\nu}F^{\mu\nu}</math>. Classical ψ configurations are coherent-state superpositions of many psions in the same low-momentum mode. Canonical particle name; supersedes "psi-quantum" and "ψ-particle". See [[Psion]].

; ψ-quantum
: Alias for [[Psion]] (deprecated in favour of "psion" in new writing).

; Psi-Phonon Polariton
: The hybridised excitation that arises in condensed tissue when the psion-photon-photon vertex (<math>\alpha\,\psi\,F^2</math>) and the photon-phonon coupling mix through a virtual photon. A third object: not a psion, not a phonon, not a photon. The operative mode-class for the H2 (modulated-UHF / [[Microwave_Auditory_Effect|Frey-class]]) hypothesis. See [[Psion-Phonon_Coupling_in_Tissue]].

; Psion-Soliton
: A semi-classical many-psion bound state - a localised, stable, non-spreading configuration of the ψ field, formally a [[Soliton_Solutions_of_Psi_Field|soliton]] solution of the <math>\lambda\psi^4</math> theory. The rigorous technical referent for what older texts call a "thought-form" or "construct".

; ψ field (psi field)
: The proposed real scalar field underlying psionic phenomena. Generated by coherent neural firing, focused attention, and tuned hardware; couples to electromagnetism and gravity. See [[Psi_Field]].

; <math>\Psi</math> (uppercase, energy density)
: The energy density carried by the ψ field — formally <math>T^{00}</math> of the ψ stress-energy tensor. What practitioners feel directly. See [[Psi_Field]] §"Energy density Ψ".

; Psionic charge <math>p</math>
: A coupling parameter that determines how strongly an object responds to ψ-field gradients. Ordinary matter has <math>p\approx 0</math>; biologically or technologically "tuned" matter can have non-zero <math>p</math>. The fundamental force law is <math>\mathbf{F} = -p\,\nabla\psi</math>.

; Psionic coupling constant <math>G_\psi</math>
: The strength of the ψ field, analogous to Newton's <math>G</math> for gravity. Empirically open. See [[Symbol_Glossary]].

; Psionic current <math>J_\psi</math>
: The source term in the ψ wave equation. Concretely: coherent neural firing patterns, focused intent, or a tuned emitter — anything that pumps the ψ field.

; Sanity-check limit
: A regime of parameters where the full theory should reduce to a known, well-tested theory. The [[Sanity_Check_Limits]] page lists every required reduction (Newtonian gravity, Maxwell, Yukawa, Schrödinger, etc.).

; Soliton
: A localised, stable, non-spreading solution of a nonlinear wave equation. The <math>\lambda\psi^4</math> self-interaction in the ψ Lagrangian admits soliton solutions — these are the rigorous basis for stable "thought-forms" and energy constructs. See [[Soliton_Solutions_of_Psi_Field]].

; Yukawa potential
: The short-range potential <math>\psi(r) = -G_\psi M\,e^{-m r}/r</math> produced by a massive scalar field. The non-zero ψ-field mass <math>m</math> gives ψ effects a finite range — the rigorous basis for ψ-shielding being possible at all.

== Math language ==

; <math>\nabla</math> (nabla)
: The spatial gradient operator. <math>\nabla\psi</math> is the vector pointing in the direction of fastest increase of ψ, with magnitude equal to the rate of increase.

; <math>\nabla^2</math> (Laplacian)
: The sum of second spatial derivatives, <math>\partial^2/\partial x^2 + \partial^2/\partial y^2 + \partial^2/\partial z^2</math>. Measures how much a field deviates from the average of its neighbours.

; <math>\Box</math> (d'Alembertian / box operator)
: The spacetime generalisation of the Laplacian: <math>\Box = -\partial^2/\partial t^2 + \nabla^2</math> (in <math>c = 1</math> units). <math>\Box\varphi = 0</math> is the wave equation.

; Christoffel symbol <math>\Gamma^\mu_{\nu\rho}</math>
: A combination of derivatives of the metric that encodes the "connection" needed to compare vectors at different points of a curved space. Appears in the geodesic equation and in covariant derivatives.

; Metric tensor <math>g_{\mu\nu}</math>
: Encodes the geometry of spacetime — distances and angles. In flat spacetime it is the Minkowski metric <math>\operatorname{diag}(-1,+1,+1,+1)</math>.

; Covariant derivative <math>\nabla_\mu</math>
: The derivative that is consistent with the curvature of the space; reduces to <math>\partial_\mu</math> in flat space.

; Klein–Gordon equation
: The relativistic wave equation for a free scalar field: <math>\Box\varphi - m^2\varphi = 0</math>. The ψ field reduces to a Klein–Gordon field in the limit <math>\lambda \to 0,\ J_\psi \to 0</math>.

; Sigmoid function
: A smooth S-shaped function (e.g. <math>f(u) = 1/(1+e^{-u})</math>) used in neural-network and Wilson–Cowan models to represent neuronal firing-rate saturation.

; Bifurcation
: A qualitative change in the behaviour of a dynamical system as a parameter crosses a critical value — e.g. a stable fixed point becoming unstable, or a new oscillation appearing. Kundalini transitions are modelled as bifurcations of the brain–ψ coupled system; see [[Wilson-Cowan_Coupled_to_Psi]].

; Fixed point
: A configuration where the dynamical equations give zero rate of change — a steady state. Resting neural baseline activity is a stable fixed point of the [[Wilson-Cowan_Model|Wilson–Cowan]] equations.

; Compactified dimension
: A spatial dimension whose extent is small and wrapped around (topologically a circle, sphere, or torus) so that ordinary 4D physics is not noticeably affected. The fifth dimension of [[Kaluza-Klein_Unification|Kaluza–Klein]] theory is compactified.

; Kaluza–Klein decomposition
: The standard procedure for getting 4D physics out of a 5D theory: expand fields in modes of the compactified extra dimension and integrate it out. See [[5D_Action_Principle]].

; Dilaton <math>\phi</math>
: A scalar field that appears in [[Kaluza-Klein_Unification|Kaluza–Klein]] theory describing the ''size'' of the compactified extra dimension. Distinct from the ψ field, though both are scalars.

; Lorenz gauge
: A specific choice of EM gauge condition (<math>\partial^\mu A_\mu = 0</math>) that simplifies the wave equation for the EM 4-potential.

; Decoherence
: The process by which a quantum superposition loses its phase coherence and behaves classically. The standard objection to brain-quantum theories is that decoherence is too fast; the [[Tegmark_Critique_and_Hagan_Rebuttal|Hagan rebuttal]] addresses this.

; Coherence
: Stable phase relationships across a quantum or classical wave system. Coherent biophoton emission, coherent microtubule oscillation, and coherent ion-lattice rotation are the three main coherence mechanisms invoked in the framework.

; Poynting vector
: The energy-flux vector of the electromagnetic field, <math>\mathbf{S} = \mathbf{E}\times\mathbf{B}</math> (Gaussian units) or <math>(1/\mu_0)\,\mathbf{E}\times\mathbf{B}</math> (SI). The [[Psi_Field|ψ analogue]] is <math>\mathbf{S}_\psi = -(\partial_t\psi)\,\nabla\psi</math>.

; Plasma frequency <math>\omega_p</math>
: The natural collective-oscillation frequency of a free-electron gas — sets the cutoff between transparent and reflective behaviour for EM waves.

== Biology and neuroscience ==

; Action potential
: The propagating voltage spike that carries information along a neuron's axon. Microsecond rise time, millivolt amplitude, kilohertz repetition rate during firing.

; Biophoton
: An ultraweak (<math>\lesssim 10^3</math> photons/<math>\mathrm{cm}^2\!\cdot\!\mathrm{s}</math>) photon emitted by living tissue, mainly from mitochondrial ROS reactions, with a broad spectrum from UV to near-IR. See [[Biophotons]].

; Microtubule
: Hollow cylindrical polymer of tubulin protein inside cells; in neurons forms cytoskeletal networks proposed by [[Stuart_Hameroff|Hameroff]] and [[Roger_Penrose|Penrose]] to support quantum coherence. See [[Microtubule]].

; Tubulin
: The protein subunit that polymerises into microtubules. Comes in <math>\alpha</math> and <math>\beta</math> forms; the <math>\alpha/\beta</math> dimer is the basic unit.

; Ganzfeld procedure
: A laboratory protocol in which a "receiver" is placed in uniform sensory environment (red light, white noise) while a "sender" attempts to transmit one of four images by intent. See [[Ganzfeld_Procedure]].

; Remote viewing
: The protocol developed at SRI under the [[Star_Gate_Program|Star Gate programme]] in which a "viewer" describes a distant target using only the target coordinates or a sealed envelope.

; EEG (electroencephalography)
: Scalp-electrode measurement of brain electrical activity, microvolt scale, frequencies <math>0.5\ \mathrm{Hz}</math> – <math>{\sim}200\ \mathrm{Hz}</math>.

; MEG (magnetoencephalography)
: SQUID or OPM measurement of the magnetic field produced by neural currents — typical scale <math>\sim 100\ \mathrm{fT}</math>.

; OPM (optically pumped magnetometer)
: A new generation of magnetometer using atomic vapour cells; sensitive to <math>\sim 10\ \mathrm{fT}/\sqrt{\mathrm{Hz}}</math> and wearable without cryogenics.

; Neural coherence
: Synchronised oscillation across populations of neurons, measurable as a phase-locked peak in EEG/MEG. Gamma-band coherence (<math>30\text{--}80\ \mathrm{Hz}</math>) is the most-studied substrate of perception and binding.

; LTP (long-term potentiation)
: The strengthening of a synapse in response to repeated firing — the canonical cellular substrate of learning and memory.

; Wilson–Cowan equation
: A coarse-grained equation for the firing rate of populations of excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Augmented with a <math>\beta\,\psi</math> coupling term it becomes [[Wilson-Cowan_Coupled_to_Psi|the canonical brain↔ψ feedback equation]].

== Quantum and information theory ==

; Wave function collapse
: The transition in standard quantum mechanics from a superposition to a single definite outcome on measurement.

; Born rule
: <math>|\psi(\mathbf{x})|^2</math> is the probability density of finding the particle at <math>\mathbf{x}</math> — the foundational postulate connecting quantum theory to measurement.

; Bohm implicate order
: [[David_Bohm|Bohm]]'s 1980 proposal that the manifest "explicate" world unfolds from a deeper "implicate" order — a holographic, non-local substrate. Sometimes connected to the [[Holonomic_Brain_Theory|Pribram holonomic model]] and to the ψ-field cosmological background.

; Hidden variables
: Variables postulated below the level of the quantum wavefunction that determine measurement outcomes deterministically. The [[Bell_Inequality|Bell inequality]] forbids ''local'' hidden variables, but allows ''non-local'' ones — Bohmian mechanics is the canonical example.

== Engineering and experiment ==

; Q factor
: Quality factor of a resonator — ratio of stored energy to energy lost per cycle. High Q means a narrow, sharp resonance.

; SAR (specific absorption rate)
: Rate at which EM energy is absorbed by tissue, in <math>\mathrm{W/kg}</math>. The ICNIRP and FCC limits are <math>1.6\ \mathrm{W/kg}</math> over 1 g (US) or <math>2\ \mathrm{W/kg}</math> over 10 g (EU/IEEE). See [[SAR_Calculation_for_Psionic_Devices]].

; Faraday cage
: A conductive enclosure that excludes external EM fields. Used to isolate experiments from RFI; used as control in some psi experiments to test the EM hypothesis.

; PMT (photomultiplier tube)
: A photon detector with single-photon sensitivity. Standard tool for biophoton measurement.

; TCSPC (time-correlated single-photon counting)
: A timing technique that records the arrival time of each detected photon to picosecond precision. Used in advanced biophoton work.

; Schumann resonance
: The Earth–ionosphere cavity resonance at <math>7.83\ \mathrm{Hz}</math> and harmonics. A natural global EM background that has been correlated with brain alpha rhythm and with [[Geomagnetism_and_Psi_Effects|geomagnetic effects on psi performance]].

; Casimir effect
: The attractive force between two close-spaced conducting plates due to the modification of the EM vacuum modes. The [[Dynamical_Casimir_Effect|dynamical Casimir effect]] is the time-varying generalisation. Both are direct evidence that vacuum energy is real — relevant to the [[Zero-Point_Energy]] backdrop of psionics.

; Stochastic resonance
: The phenomenon where adding noise to a nonlinear detector ''improves'' detection of a weak signal. A possible explanation for some weak-signal psi detection at the neural level.

== Traditions and protocols ==

; Aura
: A practitioner term for the human ψ field, especially its radial profile around the body. The [[Psi_Field]] page identifies this with the spatial distribution of <math>\Psi \equiv T^{00}(\psi)</math>.

; Chakra
: A practitioner term for a local maximum of body-localised <math>\Psi</math> with toroidal <math>\nabla\Psi</math> structure. See [[Chakras_as_Resonant_Modes]].

; Prana / Qi / Mana / Pneuma / Od / Orgone
: Tradition-specific names for what this wiki identifies as the ψ field and its energy density <math>\Psi</math>. See [[Map_of_Traditions]] for the full mapping.

; Energy ball / construct
: A practitioner-engineered, self-bound region of high <math>\Psi</math>. Mathematically a soliton solution of the [[Soliton_Solutions_of_Psi_Field|ψ field equation]] sustained by ongoing <math>J_\psi</math>.

; Shield / ward
: A practitioner-engineered shell with strong inward <math>\nabla\Psi</math>, mathematically a Yukawa-screened region around the practitioner.

; Grounding
: A practitioner technique that rapidly increases the outward ψ energy-flux <math>\mathbf{S}_\psi</math> to prevent local <math>\Psi</math> overload.

; Manifestation
: Long-term elevation of regional <math>\Psi</math> correlated with reported alteration of probabilistic outcomes. Exotic but mathematically permitted via the ψ–EM coupling term and the [[Quantization_of_the_Psi_Field|quantised-ψ probability amplitude]] framework.

; Ganzfeld
: See above (Ganzfeld procedure).

== See Also ==

* [[Symbol_Glossary]] (technical symbols)
* [[Psionics_Primer]]
* [[Psionics_FAQ]]
* [[Practice_to_Theory_Translation_Table]]
* [[Map_of_Traditions]]

== Psi-Tech Devices ==
Quick-reference for the [[Psi-Tech]] device roster (alphabetical):

* '''[[AI Nursery Vault]]''' — secure compute + model registry at [[Tho'ra HQ]].
* '''[[Coherence Beacon]]''' — fixed-site calibration emitter.
* '''[[EIN Relay Node]]''' — federated gossip node for [[Earth Intelligence Network|EIN]].
* '''[[Field Recorder]]''' — environmental multi-sensor session capture.
* '''[[Focus Lens]]''' — [[HelmKit]] AR attention overlay.
* '''[[HelmKit]]''' — operator headset + sensor + compute platform.
* '''[[Psi Anchor]]''' — site-installed near-field reference emitter.
* '''[[Psi Anomaly Detector]]''' — multi-modal ML classifier stack.
* '''[[Psi Compass]]''' — handheld gradiometer + bearing indicator.
* '''[[Psi Defender]]''' — adversarial-anomaly detect + counter on HelmKit.
* '''[[Psi Forge]]''' — operator-training facility + protocol library.
* '''[[Psi Harmonizer]]''' — natal-tuned signal generator (HelmKit module).
* '''[[Psi Lantern]]''' — hand-portable lantern-form sensor.
* '''[[Psi Mesh]]''' — short-range operator-group mesh.
* '''[[Psi Pen]]''' — stylus-form IMU recorder for trace-intent practice.
* '''[[Psi Recorder]]''' — HelmKit-side session capture.
* '''[[Psi Stabilizer]]''' — HRV-coherence biofeedback module.
* '''[[Psi Talisman]]''' — natal-sigil worn object.
* '''[[Psi Tether]]''' — paired-operator coherence link.
* '''[[Psi Tripwire]]''' — deployable environmental alert node.
* '''[[Psionic User Interface]]''' — UI doctrine for Psi-Tech.
* '''[[Resonant Beacon Grid]]''' — long-horizon federated network vision.
* '''[[Resonant Card]]''' — operator identity + key-carrier card.
* '''[[Resonant Chamber]]''' — faraday + mu-metal-shielded calibration room.
* '''[[Resonant Finder]]''' — analytical farm for Resonant candidate discovery.
* '''[[Resonant Hailer]]''' — directional acoustic + UHF hail emitter (NOVELTY).
* '''[[Schumann Lattice]]''' — distributed Schumann-band monitoring.
* '''[[Star Seer Observatory]]''' — fixed Star Seer workplace.
* '''[[Synastry Mesh]]''' — federated astrology compute.

See [[Tho'ra Tech Maturity Levels]] for Mk0/Mk1/Mk2/Mk3 status across the roster.

[[Category:Psionics]]
[[Category:Psionics primers]]
[[Category:Reference]]