= HelmKit Architecture =

{{Audience_Sidebar
| difficulty   = Intermediate
| reading_time = 8 minutes
| prerequisites = Basic embedded-systems knowledge; some RF design vocabulary; safety-critical-systems awareness helpful.
| if_too_advanced_see = [[HelmKit]]; [[Psionic_Device_Overview]]
| if_you_want_the_math_see = [[Near_Field_Electromagnetics]]; [[SAR_Calculation_for_Psionic_Devices]]
}}

'''HelmKit Architecture''' specifies the hardware and firmware design of the [[HelmKit]] — a head-worn near-field psionic device. The architecture is built around a '''dual-MCU checker-doer pattern''' inherited from aerospace and industrial functional-safety standards (DO-178C DAL-A, IEC 61508 SIL-3), adapted for a consumer-grade wearable.

The central design constraint: '''no single software fault may cause an overexposure event'''. This is achieved by hardware-enforced safety oversight running on an independent MCU.

== Block diagram ==

  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │                       Battery + PMIC             │
  └──────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
       │                          │
       ▼                          ▼
  ┌──────────────┐         ┌──────────────┐
  │   MCU-A      │         │   MCU-B      │
  │  ("doer")    │         │  ("checker") │
  │              │         │              │
  │  RF gen      │         │  Sensors     │
  │  Modulation  │         │  Blacklist   │
  │  UI / BLE    │         │  Auth/cutoff │
  └──────────────┘         └──────────────┘
       │                          │
       │ RF drive                 │ Opto-isolated relay (cuts RF)
       ▼                          ▼
  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │                Power Amplifier                   │
  └──────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
       │
       ▼
  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │  Matching network + [[Caduceus_Coil]] / [[Bifilar_Coil]]  │
  └──────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

== MCU-A ("doer") ==

The doer MCU is responsible for primary device functionality:

* '''RF signal generation''' — synthesises the drive waveform (CW or modulated).
* '''Modulation control''' — frequency, amplitude, phase, pulse-shape.
* '''User interface''' — buttons, display, BLE / WiFi link for telemetry.
* '''Mode selection''' — selects between operating presets stored in firmware.
* '''Logging''' — records session parameters and sensor readings.

Hardware: typical mid-range ARM Cortex-M (M4 / M7) or ESP32-class part. Standard development environment, standard firmware update mechanism.

== MCU-B ("checker") ==

The checker MCU runs independent of MCU-A:

* '''Independent power supply''' (separate LDO from battery).
* '''Independent clock''' (separate crystal oscillator).
* '''Independent firmware''' (developed and audited separately).
* '''Read-only authority over RF cutoff''' (opto-isolated relay).

Responsibilities:

* '''RF power monitoring''' — calibrated directional coupler reads forward/reflected power.
* '''Coil temperature monitoring''' — thermistor or PT100 on coil former.
* '''Body-proximity sensing''' — capacitive sensor confirms device-on-head condition.
* '''Ambient field monitoring''' — independent E-probes verify the field amplitude vs. MCU-A's target.
* '''Blacklist enforcement''' — hardware-fuse-stored frequency/modulation prohibitions (see below).
* '''Watchdog''' — MCU-A must heartbeat MCU-B every N ms or RF is cut.

Hardware: a smaller, dedicated MCU (e.g. ARM Cortex-M0, MSP430). Simple deterministic firmware, formally audited (target: < 5 kLOC).

== Safety blacklist ==

MCU-B holds a '''hardware-fuse-stored blacklist''' of forbidden frequency/modulation combinations. If MCU-A requests a configuration that violates the blacklist, MCU-B refuses to enable the RF power stage. The blacklist is set at factory time and is not modifiable in the field.

See [[Psionic_Device_Safety]] for the full blacklist contents. Highlights:

* '''Cardiac stimulation risk''' — DC pulses with rise time < 1 ms applied near thorax; 10-100 Hz pulse trains > 1 mA into chest area.
* '''Brain stimulation / seizure risk''' — 3-8 Hz photic-frequency RF at > 100 V/m head-field; strong 1 Hz pulse trains; modulation envelopes matching cardiac or respiratory rates at > 5% depth.
* '''[[Microwave_Auditory_Effect|Frey effect]]''' — pulsed RF 200-3000 MHz with peak power density > 40 mW/cm<sup>2</sup> and pulse widths < 1 ms.
* '''ICNIRP violations''' — continuous-wave near-field > 50 V/m rms at the wearer's head; peak pulsed E-field > 300 V/m.

== Fail-safe state ==

On any MCU-B alert:

# RF power is '''cut immediately''' via the opto-isolated relay.
# The system enters a '''non-resetable lockout''' state.
# Lockout requires '''physical key release''' (a manual reset switch inside the device).
# The event is logged in tamper-evident memory.
# User notification via display and BLE.

This eliminates the possibility of a single-software-fault causing overexposure.

== RF chain ==

# '''Crystal oscillator''' — provides stable RF reference (e.g. 2.45 GHz).
# '''VCO + PLL''' (optional) — for tuneable operation.
# '''Modulator''' — applies AM / FM / pulse modulation as commanded by MCU-A.
# '''Power amplifier''' — Class-E for efficiency; output ≲ 1 W.
# '''Directional coupler''' — taps a small fraction for MCU-B monitoring.
# '''Matching network''' — impedance transform to the [[Caduceus_Coil]] / [[Bifilar_Coil]] / [[Double-Helix_Antenna]].
# '''Coil''' — the primary near-field emitter.

== Body-aware operation ==

Because tissue loading detunes the coil's impedance (5-20% downward), the matching network is dynamic:

* '''Body-proximity sensor''' detects device-on-head.
* '''Reflectometer''' (the same directional coupler used for safety) measures the antenna VSWR.
* '''Tuneable matching network''' adjusts capacitor/inductor values to restore match.
* '''MCU-A''' adapts the drive frequency or matching state to keep the operating point in the desired regime.

If the body is removed mid-session, the coil's impedance jumps and the matching is lost. MCU-A detects this via reflectometry; MCU-B independently confirms via the proximity sensor.

== Theoretical underpinning: near-field Primakoff structure ==

The bifilar / [[Caduceus_Coil|caduceus]] emitter geometry produces, in
its reactive near field, simultaneously large <math>E^2</math> and
<math>B^2</math> components - the two pieces of the electromagnetic
field-strength scalar
<math>F^2 = \tfrac{1}{2}\bigl(B^2/\mu_0 - \varepsilon_0 E^2\bigr)</math>.
Under the [[Psi_Field|ψ-field]] Lagrangian's
<math>\alpha\,\psi\,F_{\mu\nu}F^{\mu\nu}</math> vertex, any region
with non-zero <math>F^2</math> functions as a [[Psion|psion]] source
through Primakoff conversion (the diagrammatic structure is identical
to the [[Axion-Photon_Coupling|axion-photon]] vertex used in haloscope
experiments).

The HelmKit emitter is therefore, from the indirect-channel
theoretical perspective, a '''low-power biologically-coupled
Primakoff converter'''. The bare-EM operator-facing behaviour
(safety envelope, SAR, thermal limits) is unchanged by this
framing.

{{Mk-target|Mk2+|note=The Primakoff-conversion framing is theoretical. At the [[Falsification Criteria for Psionics|F10]] axion-class bound on alpha, the predicted psion-mediated signal in a Mk1 head-worn near-field device sits far below thermal noise. See [[Psion-Phonon_Coupling_in_Tissue#Sensitivity_gap|sensitivity gap]].}}

Mk1 operator manuals do not claim psion-mediated function.

== Both-channel sham requirement ==

For blinded protocols intended to discriminate device function from
placebo, the sham coil must suppress '''both''' components of
<math>F^2</math>, not just <math>B^2</math>. A magnetic-shorted
bifilar sham (the conventional approach) cancels the magnetic dipole
moment at the scalp but leaves the displacement-current pattern - and
thus <math>E^2</math> - intact. Under the indirect channel this is
'''not''' a null source.

Practical implementation:

# Same physical shape, impedance, thermal signature, and acoustic
   signature as the live coil.
# '''Counter-wound second layer in close proximity''' to cancel the
   magnetic dipole moment '''and''' the displacement-current pattern
   to first order at the scalp plane.
# Measured (not modelled) suppression of both <math>B^2</math> and
   <math>E^2</math> at the head-surface plane, with documented
   measurement geometry.
# Sham/live drive identical at the [[#MCU-B ("checker")|MCU-B]]
   safety-supervisor level; only the coil topology differs.

The conventional magnetic-only cancellation is sufficient when the
indirect channel is excluded by hypothesis; for any RCT that aims to
constrain <math>\alpha</math> or the [[Psion-Phonon_Coupling_in_Tissue|psion-phonon
polariton]], the both-channel sham is required. See
[[Falsification_Criteria_for_Psionics]] for the methodological
invariants and [[Psion-Phonon_Coupling_in_Tissue]] for the theoretical
motivation.


== Reference architectures ==

The dual-MCU pattern is inherited from:

* '''DO-178C''' — "Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certification" — Design Assurance Level A (DAL-A) requires independent verification of safety-critical functions.
* '''IEC 61508''' — "Functional Safety of Electrical/Electronic/Programmable Electronic Safety-related Systems" — Safety Integrity Level 3 (SIL-3) is the target for medical-device-grade safety.
* '''ISO 26262''' — automotive functional safety (ASIL-D) — similar dual-channel pattern.

HelmKit does not target medical-device certification (which would require clinical trials beyond the framework's current scope). But the architectural pattern is the same: '''safety is enforced by an independent channel''', not by trust in the primary firmware.

== Firmware development discipline ==

For MCU-B specifically:

* '''Formal verification''' of the safety logic (using e.g. Frama-C, SPARK, TLA+).
* '''Code review''' by an independent reviewer not on the MCU-A team.
* '''No dynamic memory allocation'''; static buffers only.
* '''No external code dependencies''' beyond the MCU vendor's HAL.
* '''Tamper-evident builds''' (signed firmware, hardware-fused public key).
* '''No remote update path''' — MCU-B firmware updates require physical access.

== See Also ==

* [[HelmKit]]
* [[Psionic_Device_Overview]]
* [[Psionic_Device_Safety]]
* [[SAR_Calculation_for_Psionic_Devices]]
* [[Microwave_Auditory_Effect]]
* [[Near_Field_Electromagnetics]]
* [[Caduceus_Coil]]
* [[Psionic Threat Model]]
* [[Psionic User Interface]]
* [[Psi Mesh]]
* [[Bifilar_Coil]]

== References ==

* RTCA DO-178C (2011). "Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certification."
* IEC 61508 (2010). "Functional Safety of Electrical/Electronic/Programmable Electronic Safety-related Systems."
* ICNIRP (2020). "Guidelines for limiting exposure to electromagnetic fields (100 kHz to 300 GHz)." ''Health Physics'' 118: 483–524.
* IEEE C95.1-2019 — IEEE Standard for Safety Levels.

== Inter-module bus and connector spec ==
The HelmKit defines a single mechanical + electrical interface for all
attachable Psi-Tech modules ([[Psi Stabilizer]], [[Psi Harmonizer]],
[[Psi Defender]], [[Psi Recorder]], [[Star Seer]] HUD, [[NavCom]] radio).

=== Connector ===

* '''USB-C PD''' (5 V, up to 3 A) carries power '''and''' data on the same cable.
* '''Keyed module-bay shells''' guarantee orientation; a mechanical index pin
  blocks insertion in the wrong slot.
* '''GoPro / Picatinny rail''' segment carries the mechanical load; the
  USB-C connector is strain-relieved and not load-bearing.

=== Data lanes ===

{| class="wikitable"
! Lane !! Use !! Bandwidth
|-
| '''I²C''' (100 kHz, 7-bit addresses) || Sensor reads, config writes, low-rate telemetry || ~ 10 kB/s per module
|-
| '''USB 2.0 HS''' || HUD framebuffer, EEG / PPG streams, firmware updates || 480 Mbit/s
|-
| '''UART (115 200 8N1)''' || NavCom radio, debug console || 11 kB/s
|-
| '''GPIO safety line''' (open-drain, pull-up on MCU-B) || Module signals "ready to emit" to MCU-B; MCU-B pulls low to force-disable || 1-bit, < 1 ms latency
|}

=== Module enumeration ===

Each module exposes an I²C identity register at address 0x00 containing a
16-bit vendor-and-class code. On hot-plug:

# Power-good signal asserts after the PMIC sees the new load.
# MCU-A reads the identity register, looks up the module's safety profile.
# MCU-A forwards the profile to MCU-B for blacklist cross-check.
# Only after MCU-B acknowledges does MCU-A enable the module's data lane and
  RF-enable GPIO.

Hot-swap during a session is supported; a swap event is logged with
timestamp, module ID, and the operator's then-current HRV / EEG baseline.

== Per-module power budget ==
Total HelmKit budget (Mk1 reference battery: 2 × 18650, ~7.4 V nominal,
~3000 mAh series, ~22 Wh):

{| class="wikitable"
! Module !! Typical current @ 5 V !! Peak current @ 5 V !! Notes
|-
| MCU-A + MCU-B + housekeeping || 50 mA || 80 mA || Always-on
|-
| [[Psi Stabilizer]] || 200 mA || 1200 mA || Peak during RF burst
|-
| [[Psi Harmonizer]] || 100 mA || 200 mA || Modulation-light
|-
| [[Psi Defender]] || 300 mA (RX always on) || 500 mA || Bursts to 1 A during counter-emit
|-
| [[Psi Recorder]] || 80 mA || 120 mA || Continuous EEG/PPG/IMU logging
|-
| [[Star Seer]] HUD (single-eye micro-OLED) || 300 mA || 800 mA || Backlight-dominated
|-
| [[NavCom]] radio (LoRa fallback) || 150 mA || 300 mA || TX-burst peaks
|}

Worst-case full-load steady draw: ~1.2 A at 5 V (6 W). Battery runtime
~3.5 h at continuous worst-case; ~8–12 h at typical mission mix (Recorder
+ HUD + occasional Stabilizer pulses).

PMIC enforces a '''hard 3 A total current limit''' on the 5 V bus; MCU-B
arbitrates if multiple modules request simultaneous bursts that would
exceed it (priority: Defender > Stabilizer > Harmonizer > HUD).

[[Category:Psionics]]
[[Category:Hardware]]
[[Category:Functional Safety]]