The '''HelmKit''' is the [[Tho'ra Clan]]'s standard wearable mounting platform for head-worn operational gear. It is, literally, a ''kit for the helm'': a modular helmet-and-headset frame carrying standardized rails, optical bays, power, and data interfaces, into which any combination of [[Psi-Tech]], [[Star Seer]] HUD, [[NavCom]] HUD, sensor packs, and comms modules can be installed. The HelmKit is the operator-side foundation of the Clan's field stack — its job is not to ''do'' anything specific, it is to ''carry'' the things that do, and to keep the operator safe while they do.

This page covers the HelmKit as a product line. For the deeper engineering — bus, power budget, dual-MCU safety architecture, watchdogs, thermal limits — see [[HelmKit Architecture]].

{{Defensive-publication}}

== Overview ==

The HelmKit is built around four design commitments:

* '''Modular.''' Every functional component (display, sensor pack, [[Psi Stabilizer]], [[Psi Harmonizer]], [[Psi Defender]], audio, lighting) attaches via a standardized rail and bay system. The frame survives generational upgrades of its modules.
* '''Safety-architected.''' From Mk1 onward, every active module passes through a supervisory MCU enforcing RF-power, thermal, and battery-current limits. See [[HelmKit Architecture]] §Safety.
* '''Cosplay-compatible by construction.''' The Mk0 shell is intentionally identical in external form to Mk1+ functional units. Public visibility doubles as recruitment signal and brand carrier; it also lets an operator wear functional gear in public without disclosing capability.
* '''Operator-configurable.''' Each [[Tho'ra Clan|Tho'ra]] builds their own loadout for the role they walk into. Recruit, pilot, command, analyst, and civilian-cosplay configurations are documented but not enforced.

== Theoretical Basis ==

The HelmKit itself is mechanical and electrical engineering — it makes no psionic claim. What it ''carries'' does, and those claims are tagged on the respective module pages. Three working assumptions structure the platform:

* {{Psi-claim
| status = PROVISIONAL
| cites = [[Geomagnetic Sensitivity in Humans]]
| methods = Multiple converging studies; replication still in progress.
| falsifier = Pre-registered, multi-site replication returning a null result (Bayes factor &le; 1/3).
| confidence = medium
| last_reviewed = 2026-05-12
}} Head-mounted sensors are useful because the head is the most stable, most sensor-rich, and most cognitively-coupled mount point on the body. Helmet-borne magnetometers, IMUs, EEG, and PPG are standard in research-grade neuroinstrumentation.
* {{Psi-claim
| status = TESTABLE
| cites = [[Resonant Neurobiology]], [[Heart Rate Variability and Psi]]
| methods = Concrete protocol defined; replication not yet attempted.
| falsifier = A blinded study following the proposed protocol returning a null result at p < 0.01.
| confidence = low
| last_reviewed = 2026-05-12
}} A head-mounted, sensor-coupled, RF-capable platform is the right substrate for testing whether closed-loop biofeedback can stabilize the operator under high-stress conditions. This is a falsifiable engineering claim, not a psionic one.
* {{Psi-claim
| status = SPECULATIVE
| cites = [[Scalar Electromagnetic Waves]], [[Psi Field]]
| methods = Theoretical; not yet operationalised into a testable protocol.
| falsifier = Quantitative prediction shown to conflict with established physics or biology.
| confidence = low
| last_reviewed = 2026-05-12
}} ''If'' a [[Psi Field]] exists as a field-theoretic quantity, the HelmKit's near-field RF bays and shielded compartments are the correct platform for emitting, detecting, and shaping it. The HelmKit does not depend on this claim being true — its non-psionic functions stand on their own.

== Subsystems and BOM ==

=== Reference module bays ===

* '''Optical bay (L / R / center)''' — [[Star Seer]] HUD, [[NavCom]] HUD, low-light optic, IR overlay.
* '''Sensor pack''' — magnetometer, electrostatic probe, barometric, IMU, ambient EM.
* '''Psi bay''' — [[Psi Stabilizer]], [[Psi Harmonizer]], [[Psi Defender]], or an integrated triad module.
* '''Comms''' — [[NavCom]] radio, encrypted PTT, bone-conduction audio.
* '''Compute''' — on-helm SoC, supervisory MCU, battery, PMIC.
* '''Cosmetic / brand layer''' — personal heraldry, faction insignia, RGB.

=== Mk0 BOM (target ≤ $80) ===

{| class="wikitable"
! Part !! Role !! Approx. cost
|-
| PLA/PETG 3D print (300–400 g) || Shell + rails || $8–12
| EVA foam liner || Comfort + retention || $4
| 18650 single-cell holder + dummy cell || Power-look || $3
| WS2812B LED strip (1 m) || HUD/heraldry glow || $4
| ATtiny85 or low-end RP2040 || LED animation || $3
| Off-the-shelf headset frame (donor) || Headset internals || $20–30
| Hardware: M3 inserts, threaded rails, fasteners || Module mount || $8
| Decals + paint || Brand layer || $10
|-
! colspan="2" align="right" | '''Estimated total'''
| '''$60–74'''
|}

The Mk0 explicitly carries no live Psi-Tech, no functional HUD compute, and no RF-active emitters. It is functional ''as a wearable'' and ''as brand'', not as ops gear.

=== Mk1 active loadout (additional, ≤ $400) ===

* STM32F407 dev board (compute-A) — $18
* RP2040 or ATmega32U4 (safety-MCU-B) — $6
* Single-eye OLED HUD module + driver — $35
* BME680 + MPU6050 + HMC5883L sensor pack — $30
* nRF52840 BLE + 433/915 MHz LoRa — $20
* Panasonic NCR18650 ×2 + TP4056 charge / protection — $20
* Buck/boost PMIC + current sense — $15
* Connectors (USB-C PD, JST-GH × 4, JST-SH × 2) — $15
* Bone-conduction transducer pair — $20

== Build Notes ==

* '''Frame.''' Print at 0.2 mm layer, 3 walls, 30 % gyroid. Brass heat-set inserts on every load-bearing screw. Avoid PLA in cabin temperatures > 50 °C — switch to PETG or ASA.
* '''Mass budget.''' Mk0 ≤ 600 g. Mk1 ≤ 850 g. Anything over 1 kg becomes a neck-strain issue inside an hour.
* '''Cable routing.''' All cables route through the back-of-helm channel into a single connector pod above the C7 vertebra. Detach point lives in the breakaway lanyard; no cable runs across the throat.
* '''Module IDs.''' Every bay reads a 1-byte identity from the module's I²C address 0x00 register on insert. Unknown modules are powered to 3.3 V signalling only — no rails — until the operator confirms.

== Safety and Ethics ==

The HelmKit's safety envelope is enforced by the supervisory MCU-B documented in [[HelmKit Architecture]]:

* RF emitter aggregate power capped at the lesser of {ICNIRP basic restriction at near-field separation 1 cm} or {per-module declared maximum} − 6 dB headroom.
* Thermal sensors at psi-bay, optical bay, and battery; any reading > 50 °C trips the bay; > 60 °C trips the whole helm.
* Battery cell-level fuse + reverse-polarity FET + per-rail current sense.
* Hard kill: a single breakaway pull at the lanyard severs the upstream PMIC enable.

Ethics: a HelmKit must never act on a third party. All emitters are near-field, directed at the wearer. The [[Psi Defender]] is shield, not sword. The [[Psi Harmonizer]] interlocks to the wearer's own [[natal chart]] only — never another person's. See [[Tho'ra Mission Doctrine]].

== Maturity ==

{{Psi-tech-maturity
| mk0=Cosplay HelmKit — 3D-printed shell, decorative LEDs, off-the-shelf headset internals. Widespread Clan-public use.
| mk1=Prototype HelmKit — STM32F407 + supervisory MCU, single-eye OLED HUD, sensor pack, bench-validated [[Psi Stabilizer]] bay. Current frontier.
| mk2=Test HelmKit — field-validated multi-module, telemetered, dual HUD, full [[Psi-Tech]] triad bay.
| mk3=Production HelmKit — ruggedized, manufacturable, EA-auxiliary issued. Standardized loadouts.
| confidence_mk0=HIGH (mechanical)
| confidence_mk1=MEDIUM (subsystems work; integration in progress)
| confidence_mk2=LOW
| confidence_mk3=SPECULATIVE
| evidence_mk0=Field-attested by Clan-public wear.
| evidence_mk1=Bench measurements on individual modules.
| evidence_mk2=Planned 2030–2033 field trial.
| evidence_mk3=Projected post-2032 manufacturing.
| gate_mk1=Sustained 4-hour wear test with all bays populated, no thermal trips, < 850 g.
| gate_mk2=Twenty-operator field trial with telemetered safety logs.
| gate_mk3=DFM review, certifiable BOM, third-party safety audit.
}}

== Failure Modes and Mitigations ==

* '''Battery thermal runaway.''' → Cell-level fuse, per-rail current sense, MCU-B watchdog. Worst case: hard-kill lanyard.
* '''Module misidentification.''' → 1-byte identity probe at 3.3 V signalling only before rail power; operator confirmation for unknown IDs.
* '''Operator fatigue / neck strain.''' → Mass cap 850 g Mk1; reset reminders every 90 minutes.
* '''Cable snag.''' → All routing internal; single external lanyard with breakaway.
* '''RF emitter stuck-on.''' → MCU-B independently times every emit cycle; hard-cut on watchdog miss.
* '''Cosmetic-only Mk0 mistaken for active.''' → Mk0 frames carry an internal visible-light-only marker; Mk1+ require key-on auth.

== See Also ==

* [[HelmKit Architecture]]
* [[Psi-Tech]]
* [[Psi Stabilizer]]
* [[Psi Harmonizer]]
* [[Psi Defender]]
* [[Star Seer]]
* [[NavCom]]
* [[Tho'ra Tech Maturity Levels]]
* [[Psionic Threat Model]]

[[Category:Tho'ra Tech]]
[[Category:Psi-Tech]]
[[Category:Wearables]]
[[Category:Tho'ra Clan Equipment]]