{| class="infobox" style="width:300px; font-size:90%; border:1px solid #aaa; background:#f9f9f9; margin:0.5em 0 0.5em 1em; padding:0.2em; float:right;"
! colspan="2" style="background:#333; color:#fff;" | '''Holo Projectors'''
|-
| '''Type''' || Holographic projection and decoy system
|-
| '''Developer''' || [[Clan Tho'ra]]
|-
| '''Gear Tier''' || Base Tier
|-
| '''Mounting''' || Anywhere — hips, [[HelmKit]], shoulders, wrists
|-
| '''Capabilities''' || Decoys, illusions, tactical overlays, visual disguise
|-
| '''Advanced Versions''' || [[Solid-Light Technology|Solid-light]] constructs, Solid-Light Clones
|}

'''Holo Projectors''' are base-tier holographic projection devices used in the [[Fusion Engine Suit]] for deception, reconnaissance, communication, and tactical display.

== Mounting ==
Holo Projectors can be mounted anywhere on the suit. Common positions:
* '''Hips''' — [[Jono Tho'ra]]'s preferred mounting position
* '''[[HelmKit]]''' — integrated into the headpiece for heads-up display and sensor overlay
* '''Wrists''' — quick-access tactical displays
* '''Shoulders''' — area-projection for team briefings

== Capabilities ==

=== Decoys & Illusions ===
Standard Holo Projectors create visual-only holographic projections:
* '''Decoy copies''' of the wearer — multiple simultaneous projections possible
* '''Tactical illusions''' — false terrain, phantom enemies, environmental masking
* '''Battlefield maps''' — projected 3D tactical overlays for team coordination

=== Visual Disguise ===
With sufficient upgrade, projectors can visually disguise the wearer as someone else. This is '''visual only''' — the disguise does not fool physical contact, psionic sensing, or non-visual sensors.

=== Semi-Invisibility ===
A specialized '''stealth variant''' (differently manufactured) can render the wearer semi-invisible by bending light around them. This is a distinct product from standard Holo Projectors.

=== Solid-Light Projection ===
{{Main|Solid-Light Technology}}
Highly advanced projectors — like those wielded by [[Amber Tho'ra]] — can create '''[[Solid-Light Technology|solid-light]]''' constructs: holograms with physical substance. Later models in [[Final Fusion Girl]] achieve:
* '''Solid-Light Clones''' — physical duplicates with independent action capability
* '''Solid-Light constructs''' — walls, bridges, tools, weapons
* '''Solid-Light environments''' — the technology that eventually enables the [[Holo Deck]]

=== PsiSys Interface ===
The Holo Projector serves as one of the ways [[PsiSys]] "shows" information to the wearer in-world — projecting data, waypoints, threat indicators, and communication feeds directly into the wearer's visual field.

== Tech Lineage ==
{| class="wikitable"
! Generation !! Capability !! Era
|-
| Basic Projectors || Visual-only holograms, decoys || [[2035]]–[[2038]]
|-
| Enhanced Projectors || Multi-decoy, tactical overlay, limited disguise || [[2038]]–[[2040]]
|-
| Stealth Variant || Semi-invisibility (separate manufacturing) || [[2038]]+
|-
| Solid-Light Projectors || Physical holographic constructs || [[2040]]–[[2044]]
|-
| Solid-Light Clone System || Independent physical duplicates || [[Final Fusion Girl]] era
|-
| Holo Deck Integration || Full solid-light environments || Post-[[2044]]
|}

== See Also ==
* [[Solid-Light Technology]] — advanced projection
* [[HelmKit]] — integrated projection mount
* [[PsiSys]] — information display interface
* [[Holo Tech]] — higher tech-level family
* [[Holo Deck]] — facility-scale application
* [[Star Speeder Mk3]] — pocket-universe show-bay substrate
* [[The Amber Tho'ra Show]] — staged on solid-light/holographic sets

[[Category:Tho'ra Technology]]
[[Category:Fusion Tech]]
[[Category:Equipment]]