'''Psi-Tech''' is the [[Tho'ra Clan]]'s family of psionic devices designed to support, attune, and defend a single operator's [[Psi Field]]. The core line consists of three modules — the [[Psi Stabilizer]], the [[Psi Harmonizer]], and the [[Psi Defender]] — carried in the [[HelmKit]] psi-bay and grounded in the field theory laid out in [[Scientific Foundations of Psionics]].

Psi-Tech is one of the [[Tho'ra Clan|Clan's]] two technological mission pillars (the other being [[Magnetogravitics|magnetogravitic propulsion]] / the [[Magneto Speeder]] line).

== The Triad ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Module !! Function !! Doctrinal Role
|-
| [[Psi Stabilizer]] || User-controlled cognitive & emotional stabilization || Keeps you steady
|-
| [[Psi Harmonizer]] || Astrological-attunement brain entrainment || Keeps you in tune
|-
| [[Psi Defender]] || Defensive shield against psionic weapons & psychic attack || Keeps you safe
|}

All three are required for sustained Resonant-grade field operation. None alone is sufficient.

== Substrate ==

All three modules share a common substrate:
* [[HelmKit]] mount and power.
* Near-field RF emitter architecture (see [[HelmKit Architecture]]).
* Dual-MCU safety supervision.
* Operator-controlled engagement (no involuntary activation).
* Calibration against the operator's measured baseline.

The shared substrate is why the triad lives in the [[HelmKit]] psi-bay: hardware is reused; the function differs in signal pattern, not in physics.

== Public Doctrine ==

* Psi-Tech is defensive and supportive only. There is no offensive psi-weapon in the Clan's line.
* Psi-Tech engages only with the operator's consent and disengages on instability.
* Psi-Tech does not radiate effects on bystanders — it is near-field, single-operator.
* Psi-Tech specifications, safety envelopes, and failure modes are public on the wiki.

== See Also ==
* [[Psi Stabilizer]]
* [[Psi Harmonizer]]
* [[Psi Defender]]
* [[HelmKit]]
* [[HelmKit Architecture]]
* [[Psionics]]
* [[Scientific Foundations of Psionics]]
* [[Tho'ra Tech Maturity Levels]]
* [[Tho'ra Mission Doctrine]]

[[Category:Psi-Tech]]
[[Category:Tho'ra Tech]]