'''Resonant Neurobiology''' is the working hypothesis that the abstract category of '''[[Resonant]]''' — individuals with elevated ψ-field coupling — has '''measurable neurophysiological signatures''' that can be detected with standard wearable instrumentation.

This page defines those proposed signatures so that [[Resonant Finder]] models, [[Resonant Pipeline]] screening, and [[Psi Recorder]] telemetry have a concrete, testable phenotype to validate against.

{{Psi-claim
| status = TESTABLE
| cites = HRV and Psi, Coherent Quantum Effects in Biology, Orchestrated Objective Reduction
| methods = Concrete protocol defined; replication not yet attempted.
| falsifier = A blinded study following the proposed protocol returning a null result at p < 0.01.
| confidence = low
| last_reviewed = 2026-05-12
}}

== Proposed signatures ==

A candidate is scored against five orthogonal axes. Threshold values are working hypotheses pending Mk2 cohort data.

{| class="wikitable"
! Axis !! Instrument !! Provisional threshold
|-
| Resting alpha-band coherence (8–13 Hz, eyes closed) || EEG (≥ 4 channels) || Inter-channel coherence ≥ 0.7 across F3–F4–O1–O2
|-
| HRV — RMSSD at rest || PPG or ECG, 5-minute supine recording || ≥ 50 ms (mainstream "high vagal tone" boundary)
|-
| Cardio-respiratory coherence || Simultaneous HRV + breath || HeartMath-style coherence score ≥ 4 within 1 minute of intent
|-
| Phase-locking value (PLV) across frontal-parietal sites under sustained attention || EEG || ≥ 0.6 at gamma band (30–60 Hz)
|-
| Geomagnetic correlation ratio || EEG/HRV vs. local magnetometer || Significant (p < 0.05) modulation by Kp index over ≥ 14 days
|}

A candidate scoring ≥ 3 of 5 above threshold is provisionally classified '''Resonant (awakened)'''; 1–2 above is '''Resonant (latent)'''; 0 is '''non-Resonant''' on current instrumentation.

== Why these axes ==

* Alpha coherence and gamma PLV are the two best-studied EEG correlates of meditative attainment (Lutz et al., 2004; Cahn & Polich, 2006).
* HRV / RMSSD is the most-validated single biomarker of autonomic-system flexibility (Task Force, 1996; Shaffer & Ginsberg, 2017).
* Cardio-respiratory coherence is HeartMath's central measure; effect size on subjective wellbeing is small but replicable.
* Geomagnetic correlation is more speculative but follows the wiki's own [[Geomagnetic Sensitivity in Humans]] thesis.

== Confounders ==

Each signature has a non-ψ explanation:

* Meditation training raises alpha coherence and gamma PLV.
* Aerobic fitness raises RMSSD.
* HeartMath training raises cardio-respiratory coherence.
* Geomagnetic correlation may simply track sleep / season / mood.

A genuine Resonant Neurobiology signal would therefore have to show '''elevation above what training history predicts''' — i.e. the candidate is high on these axes ''without'' the training that usually causes the elevation. This is the testable claim.

== Falsification ==

If a population of candidates self-identified or astrology-flagged as Resonant shows no statistically significant elevation on these axes above a training-history-matched control group, the Resonant Neurobiology hypothesis is falsified for this measurement battery, and the [[Resonant Finder]] must be retired or its scoring re-specified.

== See also ==

* [[Resonant]]
* [[Resonant Finder]]
* [[Resonant Pipeline]]
* [[Heart Rate Variability and Psi]]
* [[Psi Recorder]]

[[Category:Psionics]]
[[Category:Resonant]]
[[Category:Testable Psi Claims]]