{{Audience_Sidebar
| difficulty   = Intermediate
| reading_time = 5 minutes
| prerequisites = [[Psionics_Primer]]; electromagnetism; Earth's atmosphere.
| if_too_advanced_see = [[Geomagnetic_Field]]
| if_you_want_the_math_see = [[Earth-Ionosphere_Cavity]]
}}

== Summary ==

The '''Schumann resonances''' are a set of '''extremely low frequency (ELF) electromagnetic resonance modes''' of the [[Earth-Ionosphere_Cavity|Earth-ionosphere cavity]] — the spherical cavity bounded below by the Earth's conducting surface and above by the lower ionosphere (~ 60-100 km altitude). The fundamental mode has frequency ~ 7.83 Hz; harmonics at approximately 14.3, 20.8, 27.3, 33.8 Hz and higher.

The resonances were '''predicted by W. O. Schumann in 1952''' ("Über die strahlungslosen Eigenschwingungen einer leitenden Kugel, die von einer Luftschicht und einer Ionosphärenhülle umgeben ist", ''Zeitschrift für Naturforschung'' 7a: 149-154) and '''first experimentally confirmed by Balser and Wagner in 1960'''. The resonance is continuously driven by global lightning activity (~ 50 strikes per second worldwide).

== Physics ==

The fundamental Schumann frequency is given approximately by:

f<sub>n</sub> = (c / 2π R) · √(n(n+1))

where c is the speed of light, R is Earth's radius, and n = 1, 2, 3, ... The simple formula predicts f<sub>1</sub> ≈ 10.6 Hz; the observed ~ 7.83 Hz reflects finite cavity-wall conductivity and lower-ionosphere altitude effects.

The cavity Q-factor is approximately 4-6 — the modes are broad rather than sharp, with bandwidths of order 1 Hz.

== Drivers and Modulation ==

* '''Global lightning activity''' is the primary energy source — the ~ 50 lightning strikes per second worldwide continuously excite the cavity.
* '''Solar / ionospheric variability''' modulates the upper-cavity boundary, producing measurable diurnal, solar-cycle, and storm-time variations in the resonance amplitudes and centre frequencies.
* '''Sprite and ELF/VLF emissions''' from intense lightning systems contribute to higher-mode excitation.

== Significance ==

In '''mainstream geophysics''', Schumann resonances are a useful global probe of lightning activity, ionospheric state, and tropospheric water content (humidity affects lightning).

In '''bioelectromagnetism and consciousness research''', the resonance frequency band (~ 7-30 Hz) overlaps directly with the dominant '''EEG frequency bands''' (alpha ~ 8-13 Hz, beta ~ 13-30 Hz, theta ~ 4-7 Hz). The overlap has motivated speculation that the Schumann field provides a background EM signal to which human brain rhythms might entrain — though direct empirical evidence for such entrainment at natural Schumann amplitudes (~ pT range) is weak.

== Psionic Relevance ==

In the [[Psionics|psionic framework]], the Schumann-resonance field is a '''candidate environmental EM substrate''' whose modulation could plausibly affect ψ-field coupling to human nervous systems. Several research groups (notably [[Michael_Persinger|Persinger]] and collaborators) have published correlations between Schumann-band geomagnetic activity and reported anomalous-cognition events.

== Theoretical context (psion-ontology annotation) ==

Resonance-locked sources (the Schumann cavity resonances, geomagnetic
pulsations, ULF natural radio) entail '''coherent-state [[Psion|psion]]
emission''' if <math>\alpha \neq 0</math> in the
<math>\alpha\,\psi\,F_{\mu\nu}F^{\mu\nu}</math> vertex, via Primakoff
conversion in the Earth's magnetosphere. The emission rate is bounded
by the [[Falsification Criteria for Psionics|F10 axion-class limit]]
on <math>\alpha</math>; at saturation, the integrated cosmological
psion flux from Schumann-locked sources is a calculable but
unmeasured-from-Earth signal. See [[Psion]] for the canonical particle
and [[Psion-Phonon_Coupling_in_Tissue]] for the local-tissue coupling.


== See Also ==

* [[Earth-Ionosphere_Cavity]]
* [[Geomagnetic_Field]]
* [[Space_Weather]]
* [[Michael_Persinger]]

== External Links ==

* Wikipedia: Schumann resonances
* HeartMath Institute GCMS (Global Coherence Monitoring System).

== References ==

* Schumann, W. O. (1952). "Über die strahlungslosen Eigenschwingungen einer leitenden Kugel, die von einer Luftschicht und einer Ionosphärenhülle umgeben ist." ''Zeitschrift für Naturforschung'' 7a: 149-154.
* Balser, M., Wagner, C. A. (1960). "Observations of Earth-ionosphere cavity resonances." ''Nature'' 188: 638-641.
* Nickolaenko, A. P., Hayakawa, M. (2002). ''Resonances in the Earth-Ionosphere Cavity.'' Kluwer.

[[Category:Psionics]]
[[Category:Environmental EM]]
[[Category:Geophysics]]